Introduction	
Like mentioned in our Project Plan the goal of our project is to investigate the change of housing affordability in the United States over the past decade. We did this by comparing trends we found in median household income then put them against trends found in housing prices accounting for inflation. Our deliverables include gathering government data, preparing it, and standardizing it, as well as calculating the measures of affordability and creating reproducible visualizations to demonstrate how quickly the prices of homes have increased relative to household incomes.

Updates on Tasks from the Project Plan
Looking at the first task, we outlined in our Project plan of identifying dataset that will be utilized for analysis. After some research we decided to use the U.S. Census Bureau income tables, FRED ASPUS home-price series, and FRED inflation dataset as our primary datasets we would be analyzing. We added these to our repository under the file “data/raw/” also documented our usage of metadata like file descriptions inside our notebook. Next, we completed the cleaning of our data. This stage required more effort than anticipated. The Census Income dataset required extensive cleaning on our hands. The reason for it is because it had multi-row headers, nonstandard formatting and other issues we had to clean. We reconstructed the header, extracted year-income pairs, properly converted numeric fields, and standardized the year entries. With the FRED housing dataset, it wasn’t as extensive as the former, but we did some cleaning by converting quarterly values to annual values. Lastly cleaned CPI dataset by calculating annual average CPI value to adjust for inflation. Cleaned were saved as income_clean.csv, housing_clean.csv, and cpi_clean.csv. Moving on to our next step in the process we focused on Data Integration and Inflation Adjustment. During this week we merged all cleaned datasets into a unified table (merged.csv) following the structure mentioned in our project plan. Using annual CPI values, we converted all income and home-price data into real 2024 dollars. This produced new variables in our notebook such as median_income_real, avg_sales_price_real, and inflation_factor_to_base. We also verified the consistency of year alignment and inspected missing values in this process as well. After we moved to calculating affordability metrics for our dataset. During this step we created all of our analytical fields described in our project plan. Some being nominal and real affordability ratios, Growth Gap Index, and Y-O-Y percent change in real income and real housing prices. We saved these elements to our merged_affordability.csv file. Next, we started our initial analysis and data visualization for our project. We plotted real vs. nominal income trends, real vs nominal home price trends, and affordability ratios over the last decade. Our visualization supported our beginning thesis that real housing prices have outpaced real household incomes for a better part of the last decade; Still need to refine some of the visualizations but expected to fully complete them by next week. Currently we have completed a draft of our workflow diagram so we can review that this week. Along with refining some of the formatting for our visualization and other analysis we can discover like potential anomalies in our data and the reason for It. We also plan to revisit our inflation adjustments to double check for accuracy because it is a key component for our entire project. Afterwards we will shift our attention to start curating our final report, making sure our process is reproducible, organizing data dictionaries and preparing for the final submission.

Updated Timeline
In week 1 all the raw datasets we utilized were successfully found and documented within our notebook. Week 2 involved extensive cleaning of our dataset primarily our Census dataset due to factors like demographic segmentation and its multi-row structure. Cleaning took longer than originally thought and extended into week 3. This same week after completion of cleaning we started inflation adjustment tasks where we were able to efficiently merge the different datasets and set ourselves up for success for the coming weeks. Week 4 went smoothly with us being able to produce our affordability metrics. Then Week 5-6 was a pivotal week for analysis for our project where we created our exploration visualizations that confirmed major trends we expected and how we will frame our findings for the final report. Now we are going into Week 7 we are focusing on completing any loose ends on our visualization tasks, if we have any edit for our workflow diagram complete that during this step and conduct further analysis. For the last few weeks of the project, we will be focused on starting to write down final analysis, curating the final report, organizing files and preparing for our final submission.

Changes to the Project Plan 
Several changes were made to the original project plan due to dataset challenges. First one was mentioned earlier but the allotted time we had for cleaning the datasets. We didn’t expect as much time as we thought it would, so it put us behind our projected schedule in the project plan but to ensure our inputs are valid, we think it was a good tradeoff. Another change involved narrowing the scope of our project. Originally, we were analyzing regional/state level affordability but decided to pivot doing national-level analysis. State-level income and home-price data did not align well in terms of structure for our project, and shifting to a national focus allowed for more accurate, reproducible results within the timeframe given for the project.



Contribution Summaries 

Eshan- He led all data acquisition and cleaning tasks. He was the one to download along with organizing the raw Census, FRED housing, and CPI datasets we utilized. Also, reconstructed Census table structures during the cleaning process and standardized numeric. Also, built the inflation-adjustment workflow using CPI data. Along with creating the original copy of the workflow diagram we’ve uploaded to our GitHub repository.  For the next couple weeks, he will aid in the visualization refinement tasks and help with the completion of the final report.

Victor- He led dataset integration, affordability metric computation and majority of the analytical tasks mentioned above. He merged the datasets Eshan cleaned and created real and nominal affordability ratios and developed the Growth Gap Index, Constructed the initial visualization that will be use as key evidence to support our claim. In the upcoming weeks he will refine final visualization, organize files and prepare for final submission. 
